Summary Introduction Scaling the number of parameters in a model, the amount of training data, or the computational budget has • proven to be an effective yet simple technique for improving model performance. The feedforward (FFW) layers in standard transformer architectures, responsible for storing "factual • knowledge", incur a linear increase in computational costs and activation memory as the hidden layer width grows. Mixture of Experts (MoE) has become a good alternative for decoupling the computational cost and the • parameter count. Recent works have found that using more experts (high granularity) increases performance. When the • number of training tokens is compute-optimal, MoEs consistently outperform dense models in terms of FLOP efficiency. Another reason to have many experts is lifelong learning. It has been proved that by simply adding new • experts and regularizing them properly, MoE models can adapt to continuous data streams. Proposed Method Introduces the Parameter Efficient Expert Retrieval (PEER) layer, which is a MoE architecture using product keys in the router and single-neuron MLPs as experts. A PEER layer consists of three components: a pool of N experts E, a corresponding set of N product keys K, and a query network q. Here is how it works: Given a query x, retrieve a subset of k experts whose corresponding product keys have the highest inner • products with the query q(x). Apply an activation function like sigmoid or softmax to obtain the router scores for these retrieved top k • experts. Compute the output by linearly combining the expert outputs weighted by the router scores. • Product-Key Retrieval If you have a large number of experts, each with a dimensionality d, then computing the top k indices can be • very expensive (O(Nd), N being >= 1e6 in this case). The authors apply the product key retrieval technique used in the "Large Memory Layers with Product Keys" • paper. Instead of using N independent d-dimensional experts as keys, use two independent subsets, each with dimensionality d/2, to form the keys. Similarly, split the query vector q(x) into two sub-queries and then apply the top-k operation to the inner • products between the sub-queries and sub-keys. This Cartesian product structure of K allows us to find the top k experts efficiently, reducing the complexity • from O(Nd) to O((√N + k^2) * d) If you are thinking why this makes sense, consider doing napkin math by taking an example. Say, N=10000(which are your keys/experts K), d = 512 (dimensionality of query vector, and each key), and you are searching for the top 10 values from the inner product of the query, and the keys. Parameter Efficient Experts and Multi-Head Retrieval In a PEER layer, every expert e is a hidden layer with a single neuron as shown below in equation 6. • This is different from the existing MoEs as the hidden layer is often set to the original size of the FFN layer. • To adjust the reduced expressiveness in the PEER layer, the authors use multi-head retrieval, similar to the • multi-head attention mechanism in transformers and the multi-head memory in PKMs. h independent query networks instead of one, each computes its query and retrieves a separate set of k • experts. However, different heads share the same pool of experts with the same set of product keys. The outputs of these h heads are simply summed up. If one expert is retrieved (k = 1) per head, using a PEER layer with h heads is the same as using one expert with h hidden neurons. The million-dollar question: Why a large number of small experts? Look at the scaling law for MoE in equation 9 in the above figure where L is the final test loss, a, b, g, γ, α, β are constants, D is the total number of training tokens, and the granularity G is the number of active experts. G = P (active) / P (expert) where: P = total number of parameters P(active) = number of active parameters per token P (expert) = size of single expert To improve model performance, we need to scale up P, D, and G. On the other hand, we need to limit P (active) because the computational and memory costs are primarily determined by the active parameters during training and inference. Now, N = P / P (expert) = P * G / P (active) This implies that we should decrease the size of each expert, and increase the number of experts N. Also: P(expert) = (2*d_model + 1) * d_expert P(active) = (2*d_model +1) * d_active; where d_model = hidden dimension of the transformer d_expert = number of hidden neurons used in one expert d_active = total number of hidden neurons activated per token For PEER, d_expert is 1, hence the granularity of PEER is always hk where h is the number of heads, and k is the number of experts retrieved per head